Transportation director and ways to
recruit and retain retain drivers in the
meantime we have leased drivers we have
leased mechanics we are hiring we have
hired a substitute Transportation
director who has now been
um
relates back to her time in retirement
and we advertised and we did hire an
interim Transportation director
he is doing extraordinarily well at this
time and the bus drivers are starting to
improve
appreciate him
um gather information needed for the
board to make a solid decision for a
resolve and that will be coming in
February January February
Finance provide comprehensive training
to the business manager recommend that
the trainer provide monthly reviews of
the 22-23 budget accounting work
alongside West Monroe County School
District business manager
we will tie all the pillars and the
goals objectives of the new five-year
strategic plan to The District budget
this will bring forth both
responsibility and transparency in
spending so that uh the magic number
really for all districts if you talk to
any super superintendent your personnel
should be running between 80 to 85
percent of your entire budget
we're a little low in this in this
District I hear we're in the 70 race 70
something percent raging personnel
um I want to take a look at that with
with Steffy in the near future
we definitely need to do something to
bring up the classified staff salaries
we're way low in those categories and
we'll be looking at raising those and I
will be working with Steffy
um
student achievement provides systemic
instructional classroom management and
training backed by solid years and years
of research
I introduced The District to a a program
called Quantum learning
I have gotten very positive feedback on
the things that I have shared about
Quantum learning it is all based on
brain research and it brings a lot of
Joy a lot of
mm-hmm
engagement both student and teacher and
just a lot of organization to this the
ways that we teach strategically we have
entry plans for students we have exit
plans for students we incorporate music
we incorporate color we incorporate a
lot of strategies that will help the
teachers the system systemic in their
instructional methods K-12 so that kids
can count on a way that things are
delivered kindergarten through 12th
grade
I will be talking more about Quantum
learning at the January 11th 3cs meeting
I've talked about it before and I'm
going to talk about it again and then
I'm going to talk about it some more so
that everybody understands what it is
you can be a great teacher and I want
you to remember this but if you work in
a failed system your work will quickly
dissipate
so it doesn't matter how good you are as
a teacher if you're not working in a
system that's working together
your efforts are going to are not going
to be realized
create a plan that will bring systemic
workings to all district measures we are
developing our five-year strategic plan
on six pillars the SE pillars are
instruction and learning Communications
culture and Climate Technologies
transportation and Facilities my leaders
are working extremely hard with those
pillars right now if I have a team
that's working ever on every one of
those they're writing out the long-term
goals and the short-term objectives and
those are defined by who is going to do
what and when
plus each of those pillars will be given
a
budget so that
the 15 to 20 percent that we're not
spending on Personnel that's pretty easy
to bring now if you've got a million a
million and a half two million that's
pretty easy to Target when you've got
six pillars where you're going to put
that money then in any taxpayers at any
time can come in and say hey can I see
where this is going I'd like to see
where my tax dollars has been simple
it's going to be laid out right in front
of you
time investigate and create a school
calendar that will enable leaders and
teachers ample time to work together for
Effective implementation of the systemic
plan for improvement
and I'm hoping to be able to glean those
Friday work days if we do so move to a
four-day work schedule to work with
those leaders and to work with those
teachers and bring this this system into
a place that it has not seen in a very
long time
recruitment and retention
consider a four day week for possible
human benefits quality of life
classified salary increase probabilities
Transportation concerns aided drivers
can take Friday trips to give students
where they need to be and attain the
extra income they need
create a recruitment brochure that
highlights West Bonner County School
District attractions which with emphasis
on our goals
curriculum set up a new curriculum
committee as per our new board policy
investigate all possible curricula after
attaining parental input in regards to
content which will be coming up January
11th there is a strong disagreement
between Progressive and conservative
points of view
it is recommended that the new
curriculum committee considered both the
new state 2023 curriculum list
and and as well as curricula such as
classical education
I will be meeting with the
executive director for classical
education
um
on the 26th in Bonners Ferry and I'm
going to sit down with him and I'm going
to learn more about this whole thing and
how it can be the possibility can be
instituted into a public school
education
and he will be our guest speaker on
January 11th
communication
continue continue 3C meetings change the
meeting time to 5 PM so more people can
come
continue all effective Communications
currently in use investigate new avenues
to enhance Communications
instabilities
facilities committee will continue to
meet study and plan for for the
assertion of facility goals and
objectives of The Five-Year Plan
summative this is my personal summative
maybe not yours so this is personal to
me
West Monterey County School District is
facing several critical issues due to
systemic failure this is not to be taken
lightly but in a conservative effort and
will demand all stakeholders to work
together in tandem
change is difficult and weighing the
consequences versus the advantages
brings forth decisions that may never
Merit 100 agreement that is the hard
fact for leadership
as your current superintendent of
schools for West Bonner County School
District I laid my hat on this summative
statement
I am so hopeful that the community as a
whole will recognize that the district
is currently working very hard to
transition our Direction with a
well-defined roadmap for opportunity
as one may guess this opportunity will
no doubt take calculated Time Management
and Resources
as the ultimate leaders of the West
Bonner County school district U the
Board of Trustees has recognized the
need for Change and change is here
that being said and as you are all well
aware our district like those throughout
the state of Idaho are reliant upon
supplemental levies I am asking please
for you to support this change that has
transpired through your positive
direction support the West Bonner County
School District by putting forth a
resolution for the 23-24 supplemental
Levy so that future goals are achievable
thank you okay thank you Jackie
um treasurer's report
um Steffy do you have anything for the
treasures report at this point in time
okay are there any questions from board
members on the treasurer's border shall
we move on
I don't think I had any on those so I
will
um move on to comments from the audience
on on for items on the agenda and
um Maureen I think you've had you had
one thank you
[Music]
be careful
Lord for all the blessings you give us
continually and in particular for your
son Jesus Christ
please bless us with your presence
tonight and open our minds and our
hearts to your will in Jesus Christ's
name in prayer I wanted to first of all
just thank both the board and the
superintendent for all of their hard
work and efforts at working on
improvements we really appreciate it
thank you
and then uh my comment was on the
transportation handbook I just noticed
when they were when we had the bus
drivers here at that one meeting
they were saying some of them were
having the parents Guardians
signed whatever that form is that they
need to be that their students are going
to be or their children are going to be
on the buses and some of them were
saying that they they didn't necessarily
have the appearance and Guardians
science
I just remember one of the bus drivers
saying yeah she made sure that you know
she had those in and I don't know if
that's in the handbook that they need to
do that but I just thought it was a
really good idea that they have it for
sure that's all okay thank you Maureen
thank you
um all right so moving on it's just
before I um just pause
does anyone want to comment on an item
on the agenda at this point or everybody
good
comments consent agenda there's
um approval of the minutes of the
meeting pay the bills new hires and
resignations
um because I'll need a motion and I'll
need a motion in a person a second
and chair make a motion that we
accept the consent agenda okay you need
a second
I'll second that okay first by Jesse
rutler second by Jesse Barton um are
there any questions specifically on any
of those items on the account s agenda
I think the only question I had Steffy
really quickly was that it seemed like
there was a different format in um in
that consent agenda and I wondered if
you could answer that question
um it looked like there was and maybe we
could
um
the first part is about your
supplemental
um the voucher supplemental account and
then
yes to the bills sorry no
no sometimes the exceptions here
um these the board approved
to the run and disperse to not incur
late fees
etc for
business operations services so I just
made sure that those were clearly
identified as being exceptions okay
um allowable exceptions and then these
would be the normal Bill Runner check
run if you will
okay does that answer your question
messenger it did I don't know if you I
know we're trying to be quick on time
tonight just because of the weather so
uh these are online and people can't see
them online okay absolutely so they're
available online and like I said I I
made sure that they were clearly labeled
applications
common so that
if there were any discrepancy on that
math immediately and
Partners Iowa okay
thank you any other questions or show
like call provoke
okay um all those in favor of
um approving the consent agenda please
say aye
aye any opposed hearing none the consent
agenda is passed
um old business is the policy second
rating of policy 11 1100 membership
um Stephanie can you
probably can't pick pull that up one
very easily did you put that in there
um basically this 1100 is the legal
description
um of the news of the zones based on the
census and that's basically what we're
approving we saw it last time I if
anyone wants to plot out the legal
description
please go ahead
um
does anyone need to see it does it is
that enough of a discussion do you know
what it is yeah
okay so basically it's a legal
description for us for the zones
all those in favor of approving the
second read of the policy 111 membership
um actually I need to
sorry I need to bring it to the table I
need a motion and a second sorry I'm
sure I make a motion that we bring to
the table of discussion of policy 1100
membership okay a second
uh Jesse Barton all those in favor say
aye aye
aye okay moving on to
um Senator Herndon thank you we it's
kind of a question and answer time for
you
um just to put note I did reach out and
did talk with uh representative Sage
Dixon last yesterday and he had kind of
he had a family conflict
um with something else and
um and given the weather I said deferred
to say you know go ahead and do your
family in your family family gathering
um please don't you know because of the
weather and he suggested that in the
future maybe next session or in January
February we might be able to zoom with
him and get an update on and
um Senator Herndon and representative
Salter maybe to get an update on what's
going on in the legislative session so I
will go ahead and I guess if um Senator
Herndon if you want to go ahead and tell
us what you're up to and you're welcome
and what committees you're on and we'll
see if there's any other questions board
members might have
I'm Scott Herndon Space Center for
district one
and our legislative session does started
January 9th and we'll be back for the
inaugural address on January 9th our
committees will begin meeting
immediately the next day especially Jay
back and also I'm also I'm a member of
The Joint finance and Appropriations
Committee and also of the education
Committee in the Senate the Senate just
everybody's background has I think 20
new members out of 35 of the Idaho State
Senate so it's going to be very
different this session than any Senate
we've seen in previous years and I can
tell you the constitution of the
membership of their their background and
their political philosophy is quite
different than any previous body of our
Idaho State Senate as well on the
education front
we're going to see we do have a new
state superintendent of Public
Instruction so that's Debbie critchfield
and I know she's got a large agenda
however she hasn't shared it with
everybody in the legislature yet so as
far as the details of what the policies
that are going to be translated into
legislation I think we're going to be
seeing that after we start on January
9th the house education committee so on
the other side of the Rotunda is almost
virtually an entirely new committee as
well they have a new chairman this year
our Senate education committee is a new
chairman and some of the big things in
education that I'm expecting to see I'll
cover a couple of things one related to
funding and then one related to actual
curriculum and some of the social issues
that are going on
so number one I know we're going to see
a bill we're going to see two related to
education I'll call it education Choice
education Freedom school choice a lot of
people have different labels related to
it so two bills that we're going to see
one is going to be an Arizona style
education savings account
and you can look up you can do Google
Search if you want to get familiar with
it it's basically where money is
allocated to all of these students in
the state and I don't know exactly how
much we're going to end up with in that
bill here in Idaho but I think it's
targeting or somewhere below five
thousand dollars per student there will
be conditions attached to those monies
you'll be able to use those monies for
attending a private school books and
other resources for Education including
laptops and things of that nature the
bill is not finalized yet but I'm just
telling you one thing that'll be that's
one bill that will be coming I'm
expecting that we're going to get
resistance to that from the iea which is
the Idaho Educators Association
basically the teachers union I'm not
sure where the isba is going to fall on
that at the moment the big argument will
be that if we do anything where Money
Follows students and it couldn't
possibly direct public money into
private education then they're going to
try to make the claim that we're going
to be defunding or taking money away
from public schools
however I'm pretty sure with the number
one we have a state budget surplus of
1.5 billion dollars is our current
estimate which basically means that
everybody in the room is being over
taxed presently so
that does also mean that we do have room
to add money to education in the form of
an Esa a second bill that we're going to
see and it's one that I actually think I
like better than the first bill and I
haven't seen the final drafts on either
one yet so I'm speaking from what I know
is being discussed about the bill so far
and currently our Ed our funding formula
for schools in the state is extremely
complex
and there are very few people in the
state that actually can explain how
school funding works so there is going
to be a new bill and I've seen the
spreadsheet and I've had it described
man I'm a big spreadsheet person and I
got it in 20 minutes so if you can go
from a school funding formula
that takes weeks or years to figure out
and get it in 20 minutes that is an
improvement right away it will be based
on enrollment which is different than
the school funding formula today so the
net result of it is I'll give you the
Tipping components out of all of the
school districts and charter schools in
the state
all of the school districts including
West Bonner will be ahead financially
and actually you your school district of
the three we have here in North Idaho
her student basis is had significantly
more than lposd and
sd101 and Bonners Ferry
all of the districts in the state and
Charter Schools will will get about at
least the same money amount of money
they do per student today and the only
two districts in the state that will end
up with slightly less is Boise and
Blaine County and to understand why that
is they're the best Finance districts in
the state the reason is they have a tax
base that is significantly stronger than
almost everybody else and they have
leveraged levies extensively and the way
this new funding formula works is it
actually is trying to disincentivize
Reliance on levies so it's trying to
make that up with State funds which in
my opinion a lot for a lot of things is
better
so that's going to be another big build
the key thing that's also in that bill
is we don't necessarily have to change
total dollars going into education but
it creates also school choice it'll have
120 million dollars in the bill that is
allocated to education savings accounts
to the amount of forty seven hundred
dollars per student that parents can
basically use for again a lot of
educational items so what we're trying
to do is get away from we're trying to
get to a position where we give parents
a lot more power over the education of
their children and we're using the same
public money that we use for public
education now to help do that without
taking money away from the current
schools so that's pretty much the goal
of that particular bill
so those are going to be two of the
major
funding formula or policy initiatives
that'll probably be the most
controversial and expecting to see
something from the state superintendent
that is probably going to be a watered
down version of school choice to try to
counter either of those two bills
on the social front
we're gonna probably see some of the
bills that we've seen in previous years
that have to do with sex education in
public schools specifically gender
identity and
I'm thinking about the different topics
so erotica there were a lot of
interesting topics that are not not
biological sets education
and there will there's a bill that has
passed three years in a row that passed
the house with almost every Republican
vote and the Senate never took it up
that bill is going to be run again and
the Senate will take it up this time and
there's going to be a couple of other
bills like that we're also identifying
whether
this is something we have to do in 2023
coming into the session
we're going to have to basically say but
we've had some schools tell us we want a
state law that basically prohibits boys
from using girls bathrooms and girls
from using voice bathroom and that's
actually a real issue even over in
Sandpoint they have two students at the
high school and one up in Bonners Ferry
that's requested to use the facility of
the opposite
biological sex that is on their birth
certificate so that bill we I was not
expecting to see this session but
because of the demand for it from others
from schools in the state I think we're
probably going to see that bill this
session
I'll give you two more things real quick
one and they're on property tax because
it does property taxes basically West
Bonner schools is a taxing district
all that money is collected locally
it's assessed locally it's dictated by
the budget that the board sets
but homeowners you how many here have
saw a big increase on their property
taxes this year
okay how many saw a decrease on their
property of Jackson nobody okay so
property taxes around here you know
assessments went way up your Market
values did but property taxes are also
up significantly and there is a real a
bill that will actually reduce your
total tax burden it's the first property
tax and actual tax cut that I've seen in
the legislature that I think is going to
get a lot of traction what it's going to
do is take part of our sales tax
revenues and right now we're targeting
I'm going to be a co-sponsor on the bill
we're targeting 10 percent of sales tax
revenues which is 300 million dollars
and we're actually going to pay that to
the counties to apply as a credit on
your property tax bill so we're going to
be taking State revenues of sales tax
and having this state pay the counties
part of your tax bill so your property
tax bill you'll get your tax bill and in
this case mine was 2500 this year
and you'll see on your tax bill a
portion that the state is going to
provide directly to the county it's
going to be hundreds on my bill 2500 I
don't remember the amount but it would
be hundreds of dollars for each
homeowner then also we're going to see
it built that I'm also playing to
co-sponsor to raise the homeowner's
exemption and fix the circuit breaker
breaker that will sh that's a tax shift
that's
that's two commercial properties second
secondary homeowners and Agricultural
and Industrial properties so those are
going to be a couple of the major
Finance impacting bills that all of us
are going to be affected by I'm not
expecting to see anything else related
to income tax cuts or sales tax cuts
this year uh but that's that's going to
spend part of our money uh that we have
in the budget surplus now I'll touch on
one final thing and that is that on
September 1st
the legislature met in a special session
and they passed one bill the governor
called them into session to consider one
bill it was House Bill one and what that
did was
there is a a group locally or around the
state called reclaim Idaho who claimed a
success because 430 million dollars was
taken from the state's general fund and
two new special education funds and I
don't mean special ad I mean two new
dedicated education funds were created
and 430 million dollars now is obligated
to come out of the state's general fund
and be placed in these two other funds
to be used for education
that does not mean that we're going to
spend 430 million dollars more a year
all we did was move money from One bank
account to two new bank accounts and so
I don't know what we're going to see on
education funding increases this year
but I suspect it's going to be in line
with the historical increases from the
past several years including trying to
keep up with inflation
foreign
those are some of the big hits open
questions
any questions
yeah that's one that I care that I've
been tracking quite a bit
and I there's going to be a lot of
discussion about that and someone does
have a policy proposal to address around
the state of the great facility means
that there are and so I I haven't seen
the ex The Proposal that I heard about
is probably a no-go because it it would
actually significantly increase taxes on
Idaho and so I'm going to guess that
with a 1.5 billion dollar budget surplus
we're not going to be real keen on
raising taxes so but we're going to
definitely be talking about facilities
this session because there are a lot of
people that care about it I care about
it so I don't know what the proposals
are going to be yet though
um
pass through the house
last year
is that is where
acquiring permission signed permission
from parents if the teacher was going to
discuss such
yes what it is is
last year was house bill 249. and it it
required a parental opt-in for certain
sexual education subjects whereas Idaho
code on all the rest of it
has a parental opt out so in other words
the kids would automatically be taught
biological sex unless the district has a
different policy which Connors Ferry for
example they have a different policy
everything is an opt-in out there so
it's standardized an opt-in on gender
dysphoria teaching
sexual orientation teaching erotica and
a lot of other odd social topics around
sex
yes um
as far as
unfunded or underfunded mandates
when those happen they put us into a
curious situation where we have to run a
supplemental Levy cover that well that
puts a lot of uncertainty every two
years whether or not how we're gonna
govern
or how we're going to manage the
district is there anything that you can
do to eliminate those or reduce those
to eliminate unfunded mandates or other
funded mandates related specifically to
the school district here correct yeah
so I the good news is that I will have a
seat on jfax so I'll be looking at
budgets and I'll know basically what
we're funneling toward education there's
going to be about 108 appropriation
bills I think they do education in at
least five total appropriation bills and
then on every policy that we consider
passing there is a what's called an sop
that goes with the bill draft and it
contains the financial impacts of the
bill and I would want to make sure that
if we're requiring something that we're
also taking into account how that's
going to get paid for because
I want to make sure that we're not
putting our school districts in a worse
position versus relative to where they
are today
so I'll be keeping an eye on that for
sure we do just so you know we we the
people that are like-minded with me do
have a majority on the education
Committee of the Senate and so we have
five out of the nine members that are in
a caucus of our own and we're definitely
planning to stick together in our caucus
so if we if I see something I don't like
I'm going to guess that I can get a
majority of the committee to basically
stop something that's unfunded to make
sure we get that corrected okay I would
say some of the unfunded mandates that
we are seeing have been associated with
special ed
and we get I think that that we have a
fairly High rate for
um I'm trying to remember the numbers
exactly the percentages but
across the board but we only get so much
for money for our
or elementary school and then we get so
much only for our high school and we
have to make up the difference so there
is there is a gap for us for
a district that has a higher percentage
of students that need assistance
so that's one of the big ones for
unfunded mandates okay so just keep your
eyes just yeah and may I suggest too
that uh you get my cell phone number
for your contacts anybody who wants
information from me in real time uh as
Steph is coming through the education
committee we're typically going to have
several days before it hits the senate
floor and so number one we'd want to
stop bad stuff in the education
committee and not let it get to the
Santa Clara where we no longer have
control over it so I'm going to know a
couple of days in advance
policies are going to be coming to the
education committee
I'll put out a newsletter at least once
a week and and if you haven't signed up
for my newsletter you can go to the
state's website and you can actually
sign up there
where you can go down find my name and
send a membership and request to sign up
alternately if you could if you want to
have input on underfunded or unfunded
mandates if you can make sure you get me
your cell phone number and make sure
that I know that you want me to keep an
eye out on something then before it hits
committee expect or even if I'm in
committee that something's there that I
have a question about that I could ask
you guys what your opinion is on
something before we vote on it and also
I noticed that
um
for each committee you can subscribe to
the Committees so you get the agenda you
get the notes you get all of that in
real time so you like jfac or education
committee for house or Senate we can do
that and be monitoring it as well but it
sounds like you'll get it before it hits
that but that's also another way yeah
and I should also and my cell phone
number if you go to the state's websites
website under Senate membership that's
my cell phone number there plus my
and also keep in mind we still do Zoom
testimony so you're able to testify
before Senate education committee or the
house of Education committee from here
so I'd encourage you to keep an eye on
the agendas if you want to have input
then and then let me know if you're
going to testify because if you do and
you want to add information and you tell
me that you what you want to say and you
don't get enough time to say it I can
ask you questions which will give you
more time to get your information to the
education committee okay does that make
sense see text and say hey Scott I'm
going to say points a b and c and if I
don't get to see when you ask me about
that okay yep okay well thank you is
there are there any last minute
questions
just the
position oh
yeah it seemed to me that maybe there
was an awful
maybe not
this I know before that that there was
always that was one of the big
complaints there was always these things
that they were
facilities and no
no
you had to fix this this and this sorry
it's a high percentage that they require
but your word you know that they want
renewed everything
that's there's a requirement you're
right and there's a requirement we get x
amount it's almost 10 we only get about
10 to 15 I think but it's required to be
more than that so it's something well it
might be more like 72 000 or some
somewhere in the 72 it's more than 10
sorry but that we have to spend x amount
more up in that 300 to 400 000 so
there's this Gap there that we have to
do
so that's a it is and Facilities you and
I have talked about we've got they're
big issues across with us and across the
state of the ejaculation
yeah and you're not alone in that uh
Bonners Ferry Valley View Elementary
School was in the same terrible
condition and then uh north side and
Sandpoint Middle School basically need
millions of dollars put into the
facilities at this point too over in
Sandpoint so
you know preventive goes a long way if
we could have done it but some difficult
with that
all right well
um thank you for showing up you're
welcome to stay for the rest of our you
know the rest of our open meeting before
we go into executive session but thank
you very much and I'll I'll send you my
cell phone up through the email and I
think um
um
so thank you all right moving on to new
business
um right now we're just gonna I think we
can hopefully flip through this pretty
quickly
um we have a I need to bring to the
table the certificate of closure for the
um November 30th and December 1st
closures of this school Madam chair and
make a motion that we bring to the table
uh critical closures okay second I'll
second that a second by uh first by
Rutledge second by Barton um any further
discussion on those
hearing none all those in favor say aye
aye aye okay moving forward on the
reconsideration and approval of
Transportation handbook and um
Jackie do you just want to quickly recap
this one just what we're doing and why
we're doing what we're doing
we are uh Stephanie can you open up the
transportation handbook and then I think
the reference was yeah
um and then there's a policy that goes
with it I did see a gap between the
policy hours days and the um and the
transportation handbook unfortunately so
we just need to quickly look at those
but if uh Jackie if you'll just recap
this one
um
Krusty Brown wondered why we had
uh
simply given a verbal warning since
we'll begin with
the festival
that was
in the in the original policy we had the
steps where it was the warning and then
the three-day suspension and then it was
I think it's the next one was the five
day suspension thank you built for three
days they took out the three days it
went straight to five and then our
special ed director came forth and said
hey that causes a lot of uh problematic
things because we have special ed kids
who you know have manifestation of of
disabilities and things happen on the
bus and if you you know we can't just
boom jump right to a five-day suspension
then you're off off the bus so
we never changed the original board
policy never did get changed to it in
accordance with the Quick Fix and the
student handbook so that the policy the
board of policy actually trumped the
student handbook because of course we we
got into a lot of trouble right off the
bat with special ed and and our services
so we backed up a little bit and said
wait wait we revealed that was we didn't
think that through so let's go back to
the original board policy and rewrite
can't get back to where it was so we put
it back in its original form so
basically the board policy now the
transportation was reversed back to
where it was so we're giving the kids
the warning the three-day suspension the
five-day suspension and then you're
kicked off by
I know that one needs to be changed to
three from three to five
okay
[Music]
is it okay so it got corrected okay so
the just is that we need a an approval
of this so I would need a motion to
approve us switching that back to
having that instead of three make it
five but um I'm sure it makes a motion
that we uh change the policy back to
five days for the third infraction
okay a second on that I'll second that
okay and then um just to address
Maureen's comment I think these are
supposed to be signed and given to the
the bus drivers um within five days of
school start so these should be if the
policy is adopted I mean if it's
implemented correctly it should be in
the hands of the bus drivers and then
get the people and
yeah
all right so all those in favor say aye
aye aye okay moving on let's do to our
policy first reading um Steffy could you
open up 3340 Word document one
and then I know there's a PDF there but
um
these are basic I'll need to bring these
I'd like to bring these all up to the
table at one time and then we can do
motion separately to approve or whatever
we need to but if we can bring them to
the table then we can discuss them
which how many power um the whole group
up to the table and then we can discuss
each one individually okay Madam chair
and the commotion that we bring the
policies in the first reading group
uh to the table for uh discussion
do you need a second
okay second by
um trustee rainbow
um first by trustee Rutledge okay so
quickly or not quickly but these are a
group of policies what you see on this
when you read through it is the first
one of the 3340 is what isba is
presenting sort of their revised version
it's very close to ours which is the
second the pdf version which says West
Bonner County School District
340.
so I guess my
recommendation so that this first read
could go easier maybe is just to if
you're okay with the isba version that
you see is that we just approved that as
the first read I put the second one that
is
I put our West Monroe County School
District policy into to complement it so
you could see which each one is the
difference between the two but they're
pretty much our policy pretty much
followed the original isba and the edits
to the isba one are pretty much what
would be the edits to our current policy
okay the
just for clarification I'm looking at
the
uh
correct faction 33 40 and it's redlined
yes the red lines are the isba editions
correct right that's the update to it
and so if you're okay with it I would
um if people are okay with it I'd ask
for a motion to approve 3340 corrective
action and actions and Punishment
like there is a summary
um
and just basically say these updates
were made based on recommendations
provided by the Idaho State Department
of Education these updates include
Corrections and further details on
suspension and expulsion of students and
disabilities this is a required update
to recommended policy we already have
the policy it is then required because
we have the policy I would say
so
so if as I said I'd entertain a motion
when anyone's ready to approve this one
in a second
or whatever your
whatever your emotion might be
I make a motion that we um strike the
gender-neutral language and leave the
that the genders in there
so leave his or her yes sir
okay and
I'm trying to understand why
do you want to table this one and we'll
discuss it next month
they're all first readings they're all
first reads
so if you want to make a motion um Keith
that you were what you're saying um
no I make a motion that we table this
until we have a full board
second okay and um table it to
um okay and we're gonna say date certain
but I'll just say let's say table it
okay and you have a second all those in
favor of of tabling 33 40 corrective
actions and punishments at this time say
aye aye aye okay moving on then to uh 30
3340p which is the corrective actions
and Punishment this one is
the summary on this one is these updates
are also based on recommendations from
the State Department of Education and
deal mainly with disciplinary action in
students with disability the updated
also includes a change regarding whether
students are allowed to make up work
while they are suspended from a class
the new item on this topic allows the
board to choose whether makeup work will
be allowed or not this is a required
update to a recommended procedure and
again we do have a procedure on this
already
so we would have to make we would have
to update it
does this go this is in conjunction with
the other one correct uh yes it is okay
I make a motion that we table this one
for the same reason as we tabled um
34 30 33 40.
so I have a recommendation a motion to
table 3340p corrective actions and
Punishment I need a second
the second trustee Barton personally
trustee Rutledge all those in favor say
aye aye
um going on to
next one the 30 35 18 treatment of
opioid overdose and
um
Jackie I think you and um Sergeant Davis
had come up with the choice that you
wanted on this one this is for
um again treatment of opioid overdoses
would you like to uh just this one
Stephanie would you mind pulling this
one up for people to see
you know Stuffy the changes the
Mr Davis make
when you grab those in my office
let me see if I have the
SE I don't see anything marked up on
this one no but it's the first it's the
it's the first read in this one um oh
that's right okay and so
um if Jackie will give me what she said
and I know Sergeant Davis is here so he
might remember I think it was once a
year and I think you included the
um
okay
so where it says training and it says
employee shall be trained once a year
um
on and it could can be online
training
on these topics and then I think there
was one more piece to it where it said
that the
train
yes
you might not be
dealers
okay
so in that first that under train that
first paragraph would be once a year
online training and include if
applicable if the district school
officer does not already carry
which they train and also I say may also
be trains to administer opioid and this
one you were saying that
um
there should be ongoing just training
for the district's school resource
officer
so that would be those would be what
would be changed in that language in
those bold sections
Stephanie were you able to pull that one
up
it's up above
episode
there it is okay
right and that's all that that's that's
what would be changed and that's what we
would be looking at adding to that for
the second read
so I'll entertain a motion I make a
motion that we accept
3518 with the edits from
Oscar Davis and
superintendent Branham
okay first I trustee Rutledge second by
trustee rival any further discussion
hearing seeing none others in favor say
aye aye um okay so this one will move
forward to first second read
next one is immunization requirements
pretty much the isba one and ours were
the same the only thing that isba did
and I will quickly read it to you is
they got rid of sort of one set applied
to child born on or before September 1st
1999 and I think the it was the fact
that
students are this update removes columns
from the tables of of immunization
requirements that apply to older cohorts
of students unless your District or
Charter School still has students in
these age groups enrolled these columns
can be removed from the policy this is
an optional update to a recommended
policy
communication
because I don't know
exemptions there's exceptions
do you have to
stop this
is that how that works yes so the
physician would have to exempt the child
in school
but there's four exemptions
um there are four exemptions on that one
and and then another one under Community
communication immunization requirements
and exemptions
thank you
and I think this language is in the
handbook
so it is in the handbook in at the
beginning of the year parents can see
this information
and it's part of their handbook so Madam
chair it's
if I understand correctly the state of
Idaho
it's it's
illegal to ask for immunization but now
we're making it required how does that
work no it
no you can be exempt at it you can
exempt out of it you don't have to read
um we can table this there are several
Idaho codes Under 39 4801 49 40 4802 and
idapa that we probably should look at we
should probably be looking at in
conjunction with this and I think we can
put it on the agenda I mean we can put
it as a resource to be able to look at
that actual language
yeah I make a motion that we table this
until
we have more information okay so I will
look at including we'll look at here all
right first and second and first like
trustee Rutledge second by trustee
Reinbold all those in favor say aye aye
okay any opposed
and the abstaining okay it passes to
table it
um so I'm just trying to make sure I
know which ones are tabled as I get in
trouble that way
um 35 25 was tabled I've got the first
two and this one will be table but
looking I'll pull up the Idaho codes
related to it so that we can look at
that in conjunction
all right 5280 Professional Standards
now this one has two come
um
isba the first one that you see
basically strikes the full Handbook of
the Idaho Idaho code of ethics of the 10
principles and just refers you to it
ours the existing West Palmer County
School District One
has the um on the first one it has an
r5280 the first two pages actually kind
of talk about personal conduct
and then it includes the Professional
Standards Commission code of ethics and
that's the piece that just that first
paragraph or two on the piece that says
professional standard commission's code
of ethics that's the same
as the isba one we for some reason added
um that first two those first two pages
of personal conduct that is unique to
our policy
so the question would be do we want to
mean you know do we just want to adopt
or look at isba and just have a very
truncated
um just focus on the code of ethics or
do we want to include that personal
conduct component of it
um that's the first question keep it
simple
so essentially Madam chair we would be
pointing to
um
ID apples
code of ethics as opposed to writing it
in ourselves right in this case idatha
changes then we don't have to worry
about it being updated and we are
matching it it would be we're just
referring to it so that's what that does
by doing it by making it reference that
it would be the current version of
whatever idapa has
so it sort of takes the onus of having
to constantly update it it's um
and then the second part as I said is
that on ours we had that code of ethics
with all that information
but there were first there were two
first page the first two pages was our
pers personal contact personal conflict
of interest
insubordinate insubordinate conduct and
then it went into the code of ethics
component
yeah
I don't see the part we were talking
about so keep scrolling down you need to
scroll down to what would be
our West Bonner County Personnel 5280 so
keep scrolling oh you might need another
you might need another document open if
you're open by documents
another document
and we're almost
5280 personal conduct yes correct yes
and that would be
you'll see that there's a two pages that
are
more wordy and then it goes into the
code of ethics
and if we if you want to table it but
just that's what it is if we want to
table it for next time but that's the
breakdown and then the only piece in
those first two pages that we want to I
would like to us to take a look at
is above the insubordinate conduct
which references nothing in this policy
shall require the superintendent board
in the case and the conflict of interest
directly relates to the superintendent
to transfer an employee to a different
position in an effort to avoid a
conflict of interest and if doing so
would not be in the best interest of the
district we might want to look at that
particular paragraph if we decide to
keep the first two pages if we don't
decide to keep the first two pages and
we just adopt isba
then we don't have to worry about it
so by Madam Chair by adopting
ispa's 5280 that strikes those first two
uh paragraphs is that correct first two
pages first two pages correct and then
how does it handle those uh situations I
don't know I'm not sure where those
those are handled
um that's where we handle it in our
policy
um
this is
I'm sure I make a motion that we
keep our current policy
with the exception of
pointing to the
um
idapa
code of conduct okay
all right and have a um
a first on keeping our current to pay
the first two pages of our policy and
the Professional Standards code of
ethics but just a pointing to adapter so
we would be using that that language
from isba is what I'm understanding
do I have a second on that one
may I propose that we table this until
we can look and do a little bit more
research on what the adap actually the
code of ethics is before we
and I either strike or ADD
and it basically the code of ethics
should be would be that section that's
going to stroke but if you want to table
it to look at that to make sure
okay if you would like to
I guess we need to pull if if a trustee
Rutledge is willing to pull his motion
we'll I will pull my motion Madam chair
okay okay then um trustee Barton do you
want to go ahead with your motion
emotion that we table this until
Research into I second yeah okay got it
so if we have a first in a second on
tabling this so we can look at idapa
where it is linked to adap all those in
favor say aye aye all right moving on we
have
um moving on to comments from the
audience for things that aren't on the
agenda is there anyone who wants to
speak at this point in time
okay hearing none moving on to board
reflection Roundtable discussion
um
just really quickly I'm I put this on
here the budget 2023 audit and letting
um
just is there anything that people want
to do with the regards to I think we're
going to start moving into the budget
um into the budget process
now that the audit is complete but does
anyone need any do in the next month in
January do us does anybody want any more
information about the audit or any more
fine-tuning on you know discussion on
the audit
okay and then the budget um
and uh the Lev and then anything on the
levy at this point in time I think that
we we look at the budget we'll have to
look at what our shortfalls are and our
options but as you know we are there are
unfunded mandates and we'll be maybe
having to well needing to look at that
Levy component as well
um in terms of the four-day school work
school week next steps um
I guess one thing I would like to do is
call up a couple of the trustees what I
heard at that meeting that work session
Community Forum was I'd like to call up
one or two that trustees that are um
their schools are doing four day school
weeks just to get a sense of what
they're interested in I think if I'm not
mistaken and um superintendent Branham
can correct me the
the
the the
um calendar committee has recirculated
and sort of updated the questionnaire
the survey correct thank you Mr George
back out there and as
the board requested it will stay out
there until after Christmas right hey
great and thank you again
um
didn't really very well thank you for
your all your efforts under the calendar
committee all their efforts on putting
the survey together putting it out
um
greatly appreciate it and something else
I know there's hiccups but we're getting
through our hiccups
you know maybe not the seniors and
they'll be leaving but this is something
that's going to fix
you know the kids
should they have any input
yes well Mr George you're looking at me
like you should have already received it
they should have yeah they they should
have already
because we got we got one you know purse
to our parents you know our personal
email that you can only take one so like
I couldn't give that to her
okay I know that there were
some students who did respond already
and and somebody responded the first
time as well
survey right now
I think that was
question really that bread I had REM is
the one that
one that tells you through
a part of the survey and Brenna was not
sure whether the board wanted that to be
solely an adult
parents and community members parents
yes little kids have jobs and yeah
things that this is going to affect so I
feel like it's fair to or younger
students that they might now be happy to
take care of
hi
totally totally open but I am I have no
we have kids I don't care anyway I just
needed need to let Brenna know do we
open that up Madam chair I make a motion
that we definitely open that up to the
students and as the as the trustee with
parent as a parent a trustee with
children school I think that's value so
probably
you don't need to change the survey or
start the survey over
over but we do these probably we send
that out to someone Skyward
so bad are you gonna contact one or do
you want me to I already know you
contact Gwen and let her know her and
Roger rerun that on Skype and we're
still good students are aware or parents
of each student or is aware and then
we'll receive that open until afterwards
okay great thank you are there other
steps with the four-day school week that
we want to see you know because like the
group that's here did attend that
Community Forum I gave you the notes I
know they've got they were posted a
little bit obviously a little bit late
or I sent them out to you late but um is
there anything else that people would
like to see from that conversation
I think just the the survey for because
there were questions whether or not the
survey was
um
available long enough that we get a good
a good
window of opportunity to get a new
cross-action on the survey and then
um the pros and cons between
um in your longer school here or a
longer day
and do any of you want to contact NHS
other trustees just to see how it works
for them okay so Joy do you want to or
no
um
I've been trying to get in contact with
them on this doesn't work okay
okay I I mean I held off my mind just to
get make sure that we were in agreement
that it was okay so I think we can maybe
reach out and be able to report back of
what we found from
and then once the two that I'm
interested in checking in with are the
two they're down south and I can't
remember I think it's Weezer voted for
four day and two of them voted no and I
wanted to find out why they voted no
I'm kind of curious why you know what to
bring something up about this
is
open I just want everybody to understand
that we're just talking about this and
at that meeting we were treated like we
had made up a decision and we were
attacked
and
and that's all right I can take it
but the fact of the matter is that
meeting was so that we could get input
from people
no
um they were some of them were
disrespectful
and I understand the emotions in it
but we just they need to be
come to the meeting
and be contributed don't
I'm tired of it they we everybody wants
transparency and our superintendent is
bending over backwards so everything up
people can come and talk and if you talk
to us respectfully we can have a better
conversation but if you start yelling
and being outrageous I'm tuning out
because I don't care to hear from people
like that
so anyway
okay thank you so I may look at um
there is a list there's a spreadsheet
that I put out with that you know on
that one pager related to the four day
school week back in November that had
references on it there is a link to the
school districts so if you want to look
at school districts that have
potentially four days I'll try to
indicate
you know just as one out not a
conversation back which ones I'm going
for so we don't duplicate
um but that's there and I can resend
that so we can look at people we might
want to and that was one of the things
that the the committee suggested that we
might look at reaching out no
can I get a hold of Stephanie
yeah well directly with me I can we can
go on to the school district we can find
that person um and I know that I mean I
can hardly find it if Steffy doesn't
have time like um if she runs into time
issues
alongside
they appreciated it thank you
so
um just really quickly I haven't gotten
here
um
I'm going to interject it between B and
C
and then we'll go to C
um
Steffy has decided that is it okay Savvy
stepping has decided that in January
she's not going to want the appointment
a board Clerk
so because business managers she wants
to focus on the business manager
component
and so what I'm suggesting I did some
research it's called isba I did some
research I talked to Kelly Fisher the
business the board clerk at Lake
Ponderay
you can be appointed or you can be hired
but it looks like the best the
recommendation is to go through our
hiring policy 5100 and give it to HR our
HR they have some descriptions they've
got steffy's description as board Clerk
and we also got the one from Lake
Ponderay that they can look at and we
can run that
um over the next month if you're okay
you know we're sort of giving direction
we're not making an action item that if
that's okay with you then we can then
what they have done at Lake Ponderay is
the
superintendent or the assistant
superintendent in the board chair
interviewed that person and then brought
that recommendation to the board at the
January meeting and so and you can
always give thumbs up thumbs down I
don't have to do it the opposite way
thumbs up thumbs down
um but if that's acceptable to you that
sort of takes it out of our hands a
little bit and runs it through our
system HR going through the policy 5100
and the HR it makes it cleaner it makes
it less cumbersome and make sure we
don't fall into pitfalls with human
resources kind of issues so is that
direction okay to take you know give
that direction to have that process
started so we would be in a position in
January the board could be in a position
in January to appoint a board clerk at
that time I mean we're hiring appointing
but we we choose that person at our
annual meeting
and we don't have emotions
because we would have to
um
what they what they have said is that we
will be picking them at the end but it
just runs it runs it through a
um human resource uh it runs it through
the process so that you you don't trip
up over yourselves in terms of human
resource issues
eventually have another you know could
be to us
sure so just for clarification because
it is a paid position in a district it
does have to go through it it's better
than it goes through HR to follow HR
policies and guidelines correct
yeah
um
actually what I'd like to say is
um we'd like not to for you to resign I
know
um I know
thank you for everything you've done
thank you
you still have to bring cookies
[Laughter]
no we don't want to I know when she said
that but we know that you know don't
want to lose her she's she's been
invaluable over this last year
especially these last six months or
since I should say since last year since
January I mean the things that we've
gone through to try to you know look at
choosing a superintendent through all
the things that we've gone through and
having that person is very critical
understanding the laws
um being doing the detail
um you know it's it's
it's gonna you know having that filling
up shoes but I think going through that
process and not having us do it
would be helpful because we'd have to
figure out the interview questions we'd
have to figure out the whole process
like we did for Supreme
yes
and they are working they are are born
yes yeah so
yeah and I I can double check we might
have to be able to have two of us so we
don't need to make a motion we don't
need to make a motion it's not an action
item I'm informing you we're just
basically saying go ahead run it
get back to us get back to us
Clerk and compare it to surrounding
districts that believe me something
going through the process
okay so actually Kelly Fisher splits
hers with assists half and half
assistant superintendent or she's the
assistant to the superintendent and
she's half board Clerk and so sometimes
it's not quite even like during certain
different times of the year she might
have more board clerk role and other
times more assistance to the
superintendent but um like when they
were hiring assist superintendent they
she the board clerk spent more time
doing that so
you know different places some people we
can also maybe look at what other places
offer their board Clerk
um this also is a comparison when we get
down to it but um
anyways that so we give directions
people can't
work
well we have an opportunity when she
resigns I don't know how it works but if
she's on here we can pull her out and
say no resignation we don't approve them
they should prove the resignation
time I'm working on making things it's
just unsustainable
no and thank you for all you've done
okay moving on now to what is up number
c on the agenda board committees
committee monthly special meetings Etc
and work sessions I've asked Jackie if
the three C's meeting in January on
January 11th if if she would be okay
maybe if we did that as a board work
session and slash Community Forum
instead in somewhat dissimilar format
that we used for this last
transportation and four-day school week
so that we could take down notes
obviously there would be presentations
and then we could take in comments from
the audience and
um
and do flip charts and then record those
notes
um I don't know what the other board
members I had asked uh Vice chair
Rutledge about that but I didn't know
what um Troy or Carlin what you thought
about that if you're okay with if you
want to say Troy asked you a question so
yeah
he's a presentation was
at D meetings where I I
find it a little bit it's a balancing
act because I don't the 3C memes is
designed
for
Community to discuss
and it's not a working session it has
nothing to do with the board it has
everything you do with the community
right it has can be open-ended up to the
communication where you know
it's not going to be
me it's going to be Beginning by
presenting to the people what the five
years of Chad strategic plan entails and
to give the community input
um
that's going to be the opening and it's
also a briefing on what is quantum
learning
and then it's going to move into
okay now we've got the how we're going
to employ teaching strategies
strategically K-12 the next thing is the
what what are we going to teach what do
the parents want their kids to learn
and what is the difference between
conservative education Progressive
liberal education you know the Gap is
getting wider and wider and wider the
controversy is getting bigger and bigger
and bigger it is it comes down to do you
want what do you want what do you want
in your system what do the parents want
their kids to learn do they want the
controversy pushed aside so that's going
to be a discussion for parents
and they're going to be able to take a
look at what is classical
ization well basically it's going back
to the way you know the way things were
back in the Baby Boomers age we learned
Reading Writing and arithmetic in
history and that's the way it was and
all the controversial stuff was left out
whereas now and with the Progressive
Movement and at the college level
stuff
so but that's going to be a parent
decision
you know not my decision if parents have
to be there and so I don't know if the
board wants to direct that or if you
want me to open that up because it's
really that second part is going to be
there's a presenter that's going to
share with you and then you as parents
are going to provide
and I guess that's the only question I
have is capturing that feedback and can
we capture it so people can see that
feedback so that would be Mike that's
where I'm wondering that's where I'm
thinking Madam chair in fact make a
recommend
I think the three C's meeting the way
Jackie runs those is Paramount now if we
want to
be there as as a silent Observer taking
notes and capturing this I would say
that'd be the best way I would
appreciate that if a couple of you would
come forth and then take your charts and
take notes that would be great but I
know what limitations on on Public
public speakings I want the parents to
be able to communicate yeah open well
three she's 11
not sure
they've been pretty successful in my
opinion
and I've attended a few of my life
I mean they're not a work tradition and
I should not call it a work session but
I I mean I'm moving over to community
forum is that's what it's more like but
I just want to be able to capture
some way be able to see if we can
capture that information do we want to
record that three C's to be able to so
people can see that input for
transparency purposes I'm wondering
especially since you're bringing
somebody in
if you have
barrier exist as well as well remembers
you know I mean we could we could do I
mean we could take notes I mean we could
be there and taking notes if you want I
just want to I don't I yeah I just don't
want to become a formalized thing with
objection and this and that year we have
little Witnesses no no no we know that's
enough let's just get into that
it's gonna be the second part I like I
will bought the energy in that second
half that is going to be a parental
thing and it's going to be there's a
presenter and they're going to be asking
questions and that's going to be that
can we record it because I think there's
going to be some really valuable
information there and that's why I'm
wondering if there's a way to record it
the way I
mean I yeah I'm with me because that's
the only thing that's why I was doing it
as when I say work session but it's
really what I'm looking at as a board
Community Forum that there's open
dialogue and that would be the only
thing so yeah
[Music]
because that might be helpful
yeah
later oh yeah we did at the now at the
annex we do I mean
without
being there if they're still working or
something we'll do that well and they
can still make comments on it or ask
questions that might be addressed later
and we could one of us could monitor
that and bring them up I mean if I
brought my computer I can monitor it and
I love him it seems like in several of
the meetings we have the big well we
didn't put the transportation thing
where we have the big white pieces of
paper where we wrote down what people
said too that's what we were talking
about because I moved the work sessions
more to a community Forum or a way to
get more input but
the first one is
okay
anybody in the audience want to be want
to be the chart takers
and really good at taking notes
that is really going to take it tomorrow
so if it's not a conflict I can I can
come and maybe take we can if we've got
the flip charts again and I think we do
with the setup of the junior high and
well if Ron's willing to set it up
um to videotape it if you did videotape
it last time I know we don't you know
it's done as a courtesy I know people
have to realize it's a courtesy and if
we don't always do it doesn't you know
it's but we're trying to do it more
often
all right so the three C's will on the
January 11th will stay three C's and if
you want um
note takers I'll offer to be one note
taker or be able to watch it on Facebook
we can watch it on Facebook and identify
if they're questions there because it's
not as rigid as a board meeting a
monthly board business meeting we can we
can look at that and try to see if
there's com you know if there's
questions there very good thank you okay
all right and then um just one quick one
do we want to
um I won't put on does anyone have a
work session that they want before the
board meeting in January on January I
think 18th is our board meeting in
January
okay all right so we'll just leave it at
that and then
um we need
[Music]
yes
and I don't think we have any other
committee meetings at this point in time
um
okay so I need to we need to move into
executive session I want to thank thank
you all for being here drive safely stay
warm and merry Christmas and happy New
Year it's a pleasure to meet you thank
you yes thank you
thank you
which basically means that if the
parents want it they have to request it
it's not just giving people
for the immunization
that means that the school district will
present it unless the parents comes out
I would like to make sure that we mirror
honors fairies opt-in so basically
everyone's certified and we have enough
to say yes it is okay for my child to go
through the success education because
that's also probably the immunization
oh
[Music]
if you decide to do that as a parent or
as a thing you can but all you have to
do is say that you're opting out as a
parent and like or you can do like my
doctors like my kids
so there you go and that's the thing is
I think we just didn't understand
I kind of thought that I was going to be
talking
at the work Session One
about the finance committee
kind of needed today
um maybe we can oh
but
um